StarTrader       Version 19.54

         StarTrader       Version 19.54
“Star Trader”; “Save the Planets”; “Trade, trade, trade”;  “Strategic trader mini economics”: by any name, this is a game to help other clans to survive, not harm each other.  It is a mini strategic economics game emphasizing cooperation over competition.  Each planet or ship is an economy having assets of resources, staff and knowledge in 7 sectors.  Each year random factors change costs and growth.  Each financial sector experiences yearly costs using up some resources and some staff.  Each year ships try to select a planet to trade with.  The trade is to benefit both the ship and planet and make them more likely to survive the year.  Planets or ships with insufficient staff or resources in any sector at the end of the year, do not survive.  Planets or ships with surplus resources and staff find more resources and grow more staff at the end of that year.  

Resource and staff costs increase in a sector as units of resource or staff increase.  An economy's health is determined by the initial resources and staff at the beginning of the year, compared to the availability of required resources and staff, (I. E. enough food, housing, water, etc. for the year).   If health is poor, everything costs more. As knowledge increases in each sector, that sector is more efficient and costs are less.  

If an economy has a trade, it trades surplus assets for needed assets.  Ships try to select planets for trade that will increase their ability to survive and grow.  

Each year after annual costs, the financial sectors with some surplus assets can increase resources and staff, find new knowledge and convert some manuals into knowledge.  Worker staff find new resources, grow new staff, and pay costs.  Teaching staffhelp staff move to a higher of 16 grades.  Researcher staff increase knowledge by  finding new knowledge and converting manuals to knowledge.

Each ship and planet is an economy.  Each economy belongs to one of 5 clans.  Each clan has its own settings for ships and planets, these settings are controlled by the clan-master.  The clans are run by robots, if no player chooses that clan, the robots use preset values. 

Trading involves a ship and a planet trading goods from strong sectors to weak sectors to improve their health. In each trade some manuals are traded, allowing knowledge to be shared between economies.  If a trade is not accepted, no manuals are shared. Generally older economies have more knowledge and can trade more manuals to new economies.  The trade process consists of each economy considering the offer from the other economy, possibly changing the offer to suit its situation better, then returning the offer to the other economy.  Each economy calculates a strategic value for each of its assets, deciding what goods are surplus to be traded and which goods are needed, important for the survival and growth of that economy.   This alternation continues until a bid is accepted without change by one economy then the same offer accepted by the other economy.  After too many rejections the trading fails.  The cost of travel is included in evaluating each trade.  Ship travel cost is a function of the distance to the next planet and the ship’s assets.  Planet travel cost for a planet is a function of the planet’s assets and a constant reflecting travel and communications on the planet.

Each economy has 2 weak financial sectors and 2 strong financial sectors.  After possible trades are swaps.  An economy may repurpose resources and staff to ensure that each financial sector has  enough resources and staff to survive to the next year.  Economies without enough resources or staff in any financial sector cannot survive to the next year, that planet or ship dies.

This is a strategy game for one to five players. The game-master sets the nature of the game as well as how the winner is picked.  The clan-masters set the economic policies for the ships and the planets in their clan. Then the game master starts a run of 1, 5, 10 or 20 years, after which players look at resulting numbers and choose whether to change their club settings.

Install the game before reading all the game settings.  This readme is available as a tab of the game display.

Clan-masters can set the favor their clan has for another clan. The higher the favor the more discount will be given the other clan in trade, and the more likely the trade will succeed.  With initial settings more trades increase the possibility of winning.

Results, stats or statistics, are reports on the life of each clan.  There are 21 different pages of statistics.  The first 3 pages are the most useful to understand the way a high score is gotten.  The other pages offer more details about various results.

There are 5 clans each including both planets and ships. At the “settings” tab, the settings for the game-master and clan-masters are selected by picking a colored button.  Gray selects settings for the game-master, each of the other colors selects settings for a clan.  The settings are made by moving a slider that changes the priority on a given condition.   Clan-masters manage the robots that run the 5 clans by changing settings for their clan.  The settings change the priorities that govern the choices that each economy makes about trading and swapping.  Of course each choice is also affected by random numbers so that each economy makes different choices from other economies and each different year.  The results show sums and averages of results.  

Players change the settings used before they are changed by the game's random multipliers.  Each year each economy experiences different random changes to their effective settings. The clans are  named the colors: red, orange, yellow, green, blue.  Eventually one clan with  the highest score is declared the winner and the stats(statistics) background is set to the color of the winning clan.  You may continue to play after a winner is selected because the winner can change after the next round of years.  Also the game-master may change the settings governing which stats do the most to select the winner. 

A winner is declared only after enough years have passed and one  clan has a score sufficiently higher than all the other clans.  Clan-masters can look in the stats tab clicking on the page numbers for different pages to try to see how to raise their score.  Their score is based on the sum of multiple scores for their clan’s ships and planets.  Clicking on the title of a row in a page puts into another block, a more detailed description of the meaning of the numbers in this row.  In a “sum” row the values for ships and planets are summed together in the ship columns, otherwise there are different sums for planets and for ships.

The game-master has seven score settings that influence the scoring, and may change the winner.  You can change your settings and continue the game even if it has picked a winner.  After more years there could be a different winner. The game master should then communicate the changes of settings to the clan-masters so they can change their clan settings to try to improve their score based on the changed master settings.

Clan-masters can go to the settings tab and click on the link of the color of their clan, then they click on up or down or one of the ten settings being displayed for their clan.  They change their clan’s settings to try to raise their score during the next round of years, and/or try to increase the number of their planets and ships that survive.  After all clan-masters are finished, the game-master starts another round of 1, 5, 10, or 20 years.  

The default settings selects the winner as the clan that gave the most help in trading the last year of the round.  Of course each clan-master must balance growth and help for each year, more economies increase the sum of clan trades.  The robots run the game for the selected number of years without any possible changes by the game-manager or the clan-manager.

This game is being developed on a Windows laptop with a screen about 1920 pixels wide and 1080 pixels deep.  It will run on smaller screens, but that may move parts of the scenes in funny ways.  Since it is written in Java, it can be run on systems other than windows with large enough screens and a java JRE (Java Runtime Environment) which allows the file ending with .jar to run on this host operating system.  

The most important settings instructions are placed early in the settings.  Additional explanations of settings are later in this README.  Because this is a strategy game, it is useful to understand the guts of the game so that clan-masters can understand the possible changes to the strategy of their clan to try to win under the priorities set by the game-master.  Of course there are always some unintended results for any change to settings.

The “keep” function, described in more detail later, enables you to keep changes, comments and sample results so those settings will be used in all later games, so that clan-masters can develop plans and strategies for exploring finances and have them preset into their next games.  One person can run several or all clans, trying different strategies for the different clans.

You can notice that planets and ships are dying and if too many die the game will create more economies.  These deaths affect your clan’s scoring.  On the first page of settings, the game-master can change the difficulty which increases or decreases the number of economy deaths each year.  If there are more economies the years take longer.  

The following explanation of how the game works, and the tables of numbers, stats, can help you understand what is happening to each clan.  You can change the clan settings to try to better your score, but as in any economics, sometimes the changes help, sometimes they don’t, and it is even harder to be sure which change helped if you change multiple settings at the same time.  Changed settings remain changed for the rest of the game, and you can use “keep” to keep settings for following games.  Have fun!!

Each year economies suffer depreciation, mines start to run out, fields won’t grow as many crops etc. so that growth decreases as planets age.  Newer planets in a clan grow better than old planets.  But older planets may have more assets and stall grow a larger number of assets in a year.

Each year some planets or ships die because they have insufficient infrastructure (short on food, or short on buildings to survive the “winter”, etc.).  If they have good health the planets will also grow with added resources and added staff.   Ships trade “goods” from planets with a surplus of certain goods to keep for the next year to trade with another planet with insufficient amounts of those goods, enabling that planet to survive; unfortunately, the ship may decide incorrectly about whether the next planet picked by the ship needs those traded goods.  Ships do not mine or grow resources and staff; to survive they must get all staff and resources from planets by trading.  And each year they need to add size to keep up with the growing size of the planet trading partners.  Ships and planets may sometimes survive one or two years without a successful trade. There are some statistics which show how planets and ships without trades grow and survive.

The planets and ships are economies with mostly similar rules and some very different priority settings. Each economy has 2 stressed financial sectors, 2 very successful financial sectors, and 3 other ok financial sectors. Of course each unit represents a large amount of the item.  

The game works to limit the amount of space needed for the game.  Each year goes through a series of stages and the game reduces an economy's space except when it is active.  When the economy is inactive only required assets are saved, the additional space required to run the stage is released until it is needed in the next stage. 
The assets of each economy is processed as 4 subassets, and knowledge/manuals associated with each subasset.  Each subasset has units of the subasset, a history of depreciation, and any gifts from the catastrophe process.  Assets are contained in the working subasset Resource and reserved subasset Cargo,  the working subasset Staff and reserved subasset Guests, in addition each financial sector has knowledge: commonKnowledges (everyone may have it), newKnowledge (found by research staff), manuals (about parts of common knowledge from other economies).

Each year ships select a relatively close planet to trade excess resources and staff for needed resources and staff.  At the end of each year all of the costs are calculated.  Each financial sector’s cost consists of charges from all of the other sectors dependent on the units in that sector and several other factors.  This means that sectors with lots of resources and staff take a lot from the small sectors with very limited resources.   Costs are increased by poor health.  Health is poor if there is a limited amount of required assets available at one or more financial sectors. Each year there are required infrastructure growth and maintenance costs necessary to survive the year but these costs do not decrease the resources and staff. Then the yearly costs for maintenance and travel are calculated and subtracted.  Any remaining assets can be used for sector growth. 
Death occurs at the end of the year if any financial sector has insufficient resources or staff for survival required units or yearly costs units. 

New staff are added during growth to the lowest staff grade while many of the staff move up one or two grades, and new knowledge is discovered by the research staff.  Engineer staff perform the work that is needed to increase resources.  Teaching staff help staff to advance grades.  Research staff discover new knowledge which makes years more efficient, decreasing the percentage costs of maintenance, travel and growth.

After a set of years are finished, the display switches to the “stats” tab.  Each row has 11 columns, a longer column with a short title of the line, than either 5 or 10 values.  If you click on the title, a longer description of the column will appear in the block above the table columns.  If only the right 5 columns are numbers, each number represents the sum of the ship and planet values for that clan.  If the numbers are too large to fit in the column, they are reduced by some number of tens, and the title will say how many zeros to add before the decimal point.  If the title ends in “thisYr”, the values are for the current year.  If the title ends in “cur/1” the values are for the current year, “cur/2” is for the previous year.  If the title ends in “cum”, this is a cumulative value, the sum of all the years.  If the year value has a “U” appended, then the numbers are the number of times the value was saved in this year or since starting the game with “cum”.  If the title year value has “ave” appended then values are the average, the values divided by the number of times added.  If % is appended to the title with “ave” or just the title, it means the numbers are a percent.  If neither “ave” or “U” is appended, the number is the sum of saved values for the year.  If you put a reason in box to the right of the remember button, then click the remember button, that row, the description and the reason will be added to the “keep” file.

There are 21 buttons with numbers. If you hover over a number a popup will list the description of the results for the number.  Click the number to fill the result table with results for that description.  Some of the pages have results grouped for different ages so you can see if values change as planets and ships age.

There are instructions at the end of this document to describe how to get the files you need to run this game and even how you can use a program called “apache-netbeans” to edit source files and change the guts of the game yourself and build your own versions of the game to run.

The game-master changes overall game settings, setting rules for all ships and planets, thus the game-master can set up many different games of economic strategy.   The game-master sets the difficulty of the game, and the amount of random increases or decreases to the priorities,  costs, growth, etc. There are five clans each with a clan-master.  One or more players can divide up the roles of game-master and clan-masters.  Clans without a clan-master run with the preset settings for that clan.  The clan-masters can alter any of the settings and leave unchanged the rest of the clan settings for the robots which calculate the moves for each clan planet and ship.

You need to download the StarTrader19.54.jar file to a folder such as myGame where you can run it following the instructions near the end of this README.  Your virus protection will possibly say that this is a bad file, or a potentially bad file, or some similar warning.  You need to keep assuring it several times that you trust the file and wish to download and run the file.  The first tab labeled “story” is a copy of this README, click the next tab “Settings” to manage the settings.

The instructions about the functioning of the game are long and complicated because all of the action is done by robots.  To instruct the robots, you need to understand their activity and the kind of decisions they are making.  Clan-masters change the values about how robots make choices, but neither the game-master or the clan-masters change rules, they only change the values about how decisions are made by the robots.

Directly under the “story” tab is a gray button called “master”, this is the tab for the game-master, and the settings shown under it are the settings for the game as a whole.  After each setting name there are one or two sliders for “planets” then “ships.”   If there is only one slider, this setting applies for both planets and ships.  As you run your mouse pointer over each name, the description in the green window below the sliders describes that setting.  The down button takes you to the next group of settings.

Beside the gray master button are 5 colored buttons named “red”, “orange”, “yellow”, “green”, “blue” for the five clans.  Click one of those buttons, such as “orange”.  The area around the settings turns orange, the settings change to those for the “orange” clan, any changes apply only to the orange clan.

If settings for one or more of the clans are unchanged, the game will run with the initial settings.  After finishing changes for the game and all clans, the game master can click either the “1 yr” or “5 yr” button to run the game for 1 or 5 years.  Sometimes you need to click again in the middle of the button to get it to take effect.

While running the game will change to the “display” tab and show some lines that change as the game runs year by year.  The color of the screen becomes the color of that clan of the current ship or planet unless the “haveColors” setting is set to less than 50.  Elapsed time is shown in milliseconds since the start of the game, start of the year, or the start of using an econ.  Each econ name starts with a “P” if a planet or with “S” if a ship,  the letters are followed by 4 digits.  The digits are the number of the created econ.  The word or words at the top left are the name of the year’s state.  A series of lines display the counts of interesting facts about the game for as the game progresses through the years.  Facts such as the number or creations, the number of trades, the number of deaths, the number of current ships and current planets.  The screen is updated around 60 times a second, a single planet or ship econ may be current for up to several seconds.

The first state is “game create”: each year the game creates enough economies to bring the number of planets and ships up to the minimum for the year.  The default number of economies grows for the first six years, then it drops to a low number, new planets or ships will be created by the game in any year where the number of economies falls below the default number.

The next state is the “future fund create”, planets or ships (economies) are created as long as remaining clan future funds.  Future funds are added each year at the year end state.  Only planets are created until there are enough planets specified by one game rule and two clan rules, only then a clan ship can be created.  By default, clan planets can only trade with as many ships as they allow clan ships.  Putting resources into ships limits the growth in worth of the clan, but it provides the infrastructure to protect planets. 

The next very quick state is “year start”, ships and planets are readied  for another year.  The state will not usually appear in the display.  This is when catastrophes occur.  They destroy much of the staff of a sector and/or resources of a sector, but this is also where econs find new resources to replace resources that have been depreciated.  Every year’s mined resources depreciates the amount of resources that can be mined the next year until no more resources can be mined.  Catastrophes help planets find additional resources, and help ships to develop new knowledge.

Since ships carry relatively large units of resources compared to planets, assume the ships are of a size like the moon, and perhaps they travel faster than light by jumping between high stress points below the surface of stars.  Ships require large staff to operate, expand and repair the ships because of the stress of the way they travel.

The next state is “search”.  A ship can only select from a limited number of planets that are close.  Planets that have already traded are eliminated unless there is a surplus of ships for planets of this clan.  Each planet and ship keeps a trade history; these histories are updated at each trade so that ships can select the planets by their search history.  The assumption is that ships do not have real time access to the current trade possibilities of any of the trading candidates.

The next state is a trade.  These are “potlatch” trades since the ship and planet do not have a common currency.  They need to evaluate each of their financial sectors of resources and staff to determine what they need the most, or what sectors have the highest strategic value, and which have the lowest strategic value.  Each partner tries to trade low strategic value goods for high strategic value goods.   Of course the trading partner may need some of your high value goods, not some of your low value goods, so at each turn the offers are changed to satisfy your own needs with goods you hope the partner will accept.  Each partner gets up to nine turns; a partner may reject a trade if the offers are too unsatisfactory by changing the turn number to -1.  A trade is accepted if both partners can accept an offer without trying to change the offer, the turn number is set to zero, the goods (cargo and guests) in the offer are actually moved between economies, then the trade is recorded as accepted.  Trades can also be “rejected” by one partner, and is then “lost” by the other partner.  If there are more ships than planets, multiple ships can attempt to trade with a given planet.  Multiple ships on a planet can also attempt to trade with each other.  

Planets and ships start trading with a support goal.  The profit goals for a clan's ships and planets can be changed by the clan-master.  These goals are later changed by the “favor” of the trading partner, and the history of trades, rejects and lost trades experienced by the clan.

After all the ships had an opportunity to trade, the next state is “endYear”.  Since endYear’s do not involve any other economy, multiple endYears can run at once.  Initially multiple cpus can run multiple threads to do endYears.  The number of threads can be changed by one of the settings.  If this option is turned on, it saves a limited amount of time but it  may introduce bugs from multiple cpu interference, although synchronized  code is supposed to prevent such interference.

During the endYear swapping function, resources and staff may be moved between working and reserved, moving reserved units cost less, but do not provide any work.  In addition resources and staff may be repurposed, that is they are moved to a different financial sector.  However this is a very costly operation that is only used if trading did not supply some of the critically needed resources or staff.  After each swap the change in costs and the resulting available units is recalculated, a test is done to see if it generated an overall benefit, if not the swap may be redone several times in ways different than done before.  Early in the swaps, an action will donate to the “future funds” some resources or staff from one of the high cost sectors reducing the costs for all of the other sectors.  In particular this reduces the costs for the sectors with few units.

Each financial sector incurs costs from each of the other sectors.  If at the end of the swaps, one or more of the sectors cannot pay the yearly costs or has insufficient infrastructure to survive the whole year then the economy of a ship or planet dies.  All of its staff and resources are lost.  Otherwise at the end of the year, when enough resources and staff are available, growth is applied to resources, staff and knowledge.  

As knowledge increases, years become more efficient and costs decrease.  Each year the research staff find new knowledge, they also convert manuals received in trades into more common knowledge.  After a year, some of the new knowledge becomes common knowledge.

After each run a large set of statistics about the planets and ships is available to be viewed,  Ata couple of year,  another ship or planet will be established at the same location. By default, between 10% to 20% of planet and ships die each year.

At the end of the run of years the window should change to the “stats” tab.  There are 21 buttons for 21 different views of the statistics about what happened with the clan finances.  There are also buttons to run the game for 1 or 5 or 10 or 20 years.  When one of the year buttons is  clicked the screen goes back to the display tab.

After you have become familiar with the game by running it several times you can “keep” some of the settings you change, so that they will be automatically set to that kept value in the following games.  You can also write comments to indicate why you made the changes.  You keep settings by clicking the “keep” button, then any changes you have made on the current settings page will be kept when you leave that page.  These kept values are in a file called “keep”.  You can find the “keep” file in the same folder into which you copied the java .jar or .exe file.  You can also use the “remember” button on the statistics pages to remember a line whose title you click.  
Runs can be 1 year, 5 years, 10 or 20 years.  Initial difficulty settings make it so that between 7% to 40% of the economies die each year.  Statistics after each run help show the problems the ship and planets failed and may give some ideas about changing clan priorities to increase planet and ship survival. 

If too many or not enough economies fail each year, the game master can change a game difficulty setting to alter results. After each run, the clan-masters can view their statistics, then each clan-master can change a few settings, then when the they finish changing settings, the game-master starts another run.  It is a good strategy to only change a few settings at each new run, keep the settings and a comment about why you changed the setting, you may also want to “remember” how some results that suggested the change in settings.

The game-master changes settings about how all planets and ships survive and grow.  Also the game-master can adjust how the winning score is calculated and when the score is good enough to win the game.  “Save the planets”  increases the score of a clan based on the number of planets and ships that the clan's barters have helped, and how much the barters helped.  The game-master can change settings so that  “Highest worth wins”, or “most planets wins” or many other games.  You can play the game for as many runs as you choose. 

At the start of the year each economy projects what its resources will be at the end of the year. Each resource and staff sector is given a strategic value  related to how much more is needed to make a good year.  In addition, if a planet or ship might not survive the year with the current resources and staff, an SOS flag is set.  Each year each ship tries to find a planet for a good trade in a way that both of them will be more able to survive and have good growth.  The game-master can adjust how much the ship knows about planets. Ships may know nothing and just make a random choice.  Ships may be able to use a history that is updated every time they trade with a planet,  Ships may be able to get direct knowledge about what planets have to make the best trade, combined with the cost of travel to that planet.

Clan-masters choose a friendship level with each of the other clans.  The higher the friendship, the better trade will be given that clan ships and planets.  Ships can trade with each other, if more than one ship is trading at a given planet.  

Each year there are costs for simply living called “maintenance”, communicating and moving between parts of the economy or between planets called “travel”, and hopefully increasing resources, staff and knowledge called “growth”. When a planet or ship has enough to survive the year,  the additional resources determine the health of the planet or ship.  Planets and ships with poor health are less efficient in doing the required work for that year.  This means that life and growth take more resources and staff and accomplishes less.  The work becomes more efficient for each sector each year as the knowledge for that sector increases.  

When there are more resources and/or staff than needed for maintenance and travel, those resources and work can be applied to growth in that sector.  Each of the required  or infrastructure Maintenance and required or infrastructure Growth require a combination of resources and staff, just as growth requires a combination of resources and staff.  Every year each financial sector will only be able to do the amount of work enabled by the required combination of resources and staff, there will be some resources or staff for each sector which cannot be used.

The resources and staff subAssets for each sector are working resources and staff.   Cargo and guest subAssets are the reserved resources and staff, they do no work and their yearly costs are reduced, they are available to convert to working assets or to be traded.

Each year during the Cash Flow activity, the potential costs for each financial sector are calculated.  Any sectors with insufficient prospective resources or work to meet the required costs, must move any available reserves to working status.  If that is not enough assets from other sectors may be repurposed.  Of course the cost of such repurposing is quite high, taking well over 10 times the resulting increase in assets for the needy sector.

The game-master sets a number of priorities and values over the game for all the clans.  The game-master adjusts the difficulty of the game and other options that significantly change the nature of challenges in the game.  A normal goal is to have no more than 10% of ships and 10% of planets die in a single year of the game.  Catastrophes can occur at the year start before it is time to trade.  A catastrophe can destroy a large fraction of the resources for one or two financial sectors, and the staff for a financial sector, but they also discover additional resources for one or more sectors.  These additional resources replace the decay of resources as they are mined

The game-master chooses which results are most important for deciding the winner in the game.  The winner may be the clan that gave the most help to clans, or that helped the most planets or the most planets and ships, or had the highest worth, or had the most planets, etc.  The winner may change after each run of one or more years.  

After players have set clan priorities and other levels, the game-master can run the game for 1,5,10, or 20 years.  When the years are finished, results are available, there are 21 different pages showing different results and showing some of the same results in different ways.  Pages 0,1,2 list the most important results.  Any page with the score at the top will be set to the background color of the clan with the highest score, the winner when the score gets good enough to win.

Each planet and ship have seven financial sectors.  Each sector has resources, cargo(resource but in reserve not working), staff, guests(staff but in reserve not working), and knowledge of 3 kinds (common knowledge, new knowledge, and manuals(researchers work to get new knowledge or common knowledge from manuals), but trades can only trade manuals from ships).
 
The game is available in a folder at: 
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1P-hw8Wk9BcwEdHSS8CdAbDDjtjyEQTF_?usp=sharing.  The folder contains a pdf of this README and the file StarTrader.jar.  

You need to download the StarTraderMaven-19.40.jar file to a place where you can run it following the instructions near the end of this README. First make a new folder in the downloads folder, with the name myGame.  Download the StarTraderMaven-19.40.jar to the folder downloads\myGame.  You must download to a folder that is not part of a streaming memory such as GoogleDrive, the jar file gets stuck trying to run on a streaming memory.  Double click on the StarTraderMaven-19.40.jar file in myGame to run the game.  Check for new subversions of the game at least once a month.  Each copy of  the newly downloaded file has a version.subversion added to the name.  Delete unwanted files by right clicking the file and choosing the delete option. The .jar file will only run if you have a java jre 1.8 installed.  Use https://www.java.com/download/ie_manual.jsp to download the latest java jre (java runtime environment).  This decodes the java.jar file into instructions that run within windows. s You will need to accept a license saying that you are not a commercial company.
StarTrader is set up to run on a Windows 10 machine with at least an 11 or 12 inch screen.  It will probably run on other desktop or laptops, if they will also have a current Java.  Instructions for running the game are given much earlier in the README.

Ignore the following instructions unless you want to try to change the guts of the game.
The source of the game is in the folder you downloaded, go to src.java.trade. (all the source files)
I use Apache Netbeans, the latest version, and the latest java 1.8 version of java.  The java being automatically distributed to Windows 11 machines by Oracle is the latest version of java.1.8 jre.  You can download a corresponding JDK from Oracle after signing their license. 
Here are many of the settings you will need  in Apache NetBeans currently version 12.4.  You must be logged in as a windows administrator to have the windows permissions to install NetBeans.  

Once you have installed NetBeans and downloaded the source files:
1.Left Click the NetBeans Tools menu and select Java Platforms, click "Add Platform..." browse to C:\Program Files\Java and choose the latest installed jdk1.8.0_xxx 
2.Open NetBeans IDE and create a new ant project with the existing source
3.Create a source folder such as C:\Users\Public\netbeans\Trader19.xx
4.Right click the project name, at versioning create a git repository in Trader19.xx
5.Right click the project name, at git select pull and fill out the form as requested
6.Right click the project name, select properties, select formatting, select project specific options, choose all languages, choose Tabs And Indents, Enable Indentation, Expand Tabs to Spaces, Number of Spaces per indent=2, tab Size = 2, Right Margin=80,Line Wrap After words
7.Download the latest Java 8 JDK after signing the license, install it into the Java folder under C:\Program Files
8.Right click the project name, select properties, and under “Source Packages” select the package “trade” to get a list of the Java Classes.  The StarTrader.java source contains the ‘main’ method with the user interface logic.  Classes E.java and EM.java contain lots of data tables needed for the user interface, E.java contains most of the fixed data, EM.java contains data that can change from the user settings changes and the statistics of the current run of the game, EM.java also contains methods for processing settings and statistics.


